+++
title = "Lesson 3 Project Planning 1"
date = "2023-03-21T17:04:50-06:00"
author = "Tommie Matherne"
authorTwitter = "" #do not include @
cover = ""
tags = ["Project Planning", "Beginners", "Python"]
keywords = ["project planning", "beginners", "#Python"]
description = "Now that we know our way around the operating system, we can get a bit geeky with it and make it do what we want. The first step to that is deciding what we want it to do."
showFullContent = false
readingTime = true
hideComments = false
color = "" #color from the theme settings
+++

## Programming like a Lone Wolf

Now that we know enough about the system we find ourselves in, we can begin to make it do some interesting things if we are just brave enough to do some programming. For many, programming can seem like a daunting task. They look at the programs they use daily, with all the moving parts and cloud interactions, then they see the kind of salaries that are commanded by the folks writing such things, and feel that programming is a forum for some elite class of people. This wasn't always the way, though.

Growing up in the 1980s, I can remember perusing books on the racks at my local pharmacy newsstand and seeing among them titles like *Basic Computer Games* on the shelf. Inside were complete code listings for games. You buy the book, bring it home, and, provided your computer understood the Basic Programming Language used in the book, type in the code and you had a game to play. After that, if you were brave, you could get into the code that was just typed in, change it, and see how that made the game different. 

Personally, I grew up too poor for my family to own a computer during those halcyon days. I didn't actually get into programming until well after I graduated high school some years later, and my first foray into programming was with Java. My first programs were standards like "Hello, World!", and learning the basics with console programs that emulated a bank account and ATM. It was quite boring. I always wished that there was a way to return to those earlier times, and learn to program with making a game, even if it did run in a terminal rather than a graphical interface. My first gaming experience on a computer was *Zork* at a friend's house, so I knew that games could well be text based. Alas, even writing a parser game is more complicated than can be expected for a beginner.

**BUT** there are alternatives! On those very same newsstands, I was introduced to another very classic form of 1980s gaming that didn't involve a computer, but could keep an imaginative youth occupied for days! Game books! Most are familiar with the line of *Choose-Your-Own-Adventure* books. Short novels that always ended up being more short stories because the story was a branching path, and there were often ten or more ways for the story to end. There also existed another offshoot that was much more involved. Book series such as *Fighting Fantasy* and *The Lone Wolf* books invited you to create a character, choose skills, and even fight or flee using magic, weapons, and armor that you can pick up along your journeys. These are what we are going to create as our first project.

## But, how the hell are we gonna do it?

This alone may seem like a daunting task. Putting words to the screen, gathering inputs from a user, creating a character, managing an inventory, keeping track of enemies, health, and a lot of other items. The first part of any project is to identify all the things that need to be done, breaking them down into their pieces, and chewing each one up until it can be spit out into a file.

Unfortunately, the Basic Programming Language, which was simple enough for elementary school kids to get the hang of with a few books defining the games to be played, is no longer an option. We do, however, have a programming language that shares many traits: simple syntax rules that are easy to read, a small amount of basic information to create things with, and the ability to create a file that can run on a multitude of machines. If you haven't been following along with the Linux portion of these tutorials so far, you can still follow along with this! Python files can run anywhere that a Python interpreter is installed, and unless you are doing rather advanced work, it will run fine. This project will **NOT** include any of that advanced workings. So long as you have any system with Python installed, you can follow along. For my own sake of nostalgia for a command line, though, I hope you decide to do this with Linux. 

So, let's break down what we are going to need in order to create this, and set an expectation of what it will look like, both on disk and while running, when we are done. First of all, let's nail down exactly what we are going for. The *Choose-Your-Own-Adventure* books were great for what they were, but I want to introduce programming to you with a project that will take you from no programming knowledge to managing multiple files, writing your own classes and functions, and managing it all easily, in one project. For that, we need those extra pieces. *Fighting Fantasy* was a great entry, and one I wanted to go with at first, but those are still under copyrights and hard to come by easily. 

*The Lone Wolf*, however, has been released into the wild under the licensing of Project Aon. I'm not going to link that as it isn't important as I encourage you to follow the mechanics and create your own story with it. I do mention it, however, as it means you can get more familiar with the way the books worked. *The World of Lone Wolf* as a series of game books is actually available on iPhone and Android as a free app, where you can do everything that was available in the original books, and get a feel for what we are going to create. There are also many blogs written online about the books themselves so you can see what they were like and how they were played. I encourage you to do both.

Once you are familiar with what the outcome is going to be, the question becomes, how to get it done. Each of these concepts and thier management are going to be the topic of their own posts, so detail is going to be light for now. If you are so inclined, I invite you to search a bit on the concepts introduced and get familiar with them, but I warn you about going too deep into rabbit holes. Becoming more overwhelmed will not do you any good. These are deep concepts, and writing on them can get dense. Familiarity will come with more through actually accomplishing the tasks rather than reading about them. Get some understanding, but follow along for the greatest benefit.

The first item on the agenda is going to be actually creating a character. This will cover gathering input from a user, randomly assigning some stats, and allowing skills that will be useful later for the character, and storing them all in a way that these numbers and abilities can later be recalled and used by our program. For this, we are going to use data structures such as the list, as well as our first foray into creating classes. Even if this is your first time programming, you may have heard of **object-oriented programming** before. The class is the basic building block of how this is done.

Next up, we will have to also create an inventory, again, lists pop up, but we will also be using classes for each item that can detail how it can be used, what it's effects will be, and any changes to the world that could possibly be wrought. So a list of objects created from these classes! The effects that things can have will be accomplished through the use of functions within the classes. Functions are simply pieces of reusable code, that way we can name the function, describe it with code, and then reliably call that name whenever we want that effect to take place. 

Of course, this is a story, so we will have to be able to put words on the screen. At the end of each bit of text, we will have to prompt for a choice, so user input will once again rear it's head, but this time, we will not be using the input to generate an object (character), but to decide what piece of code to call next. And with how long screens of text will be, we may as well chop up each scene of our story into it's own file. This section will go into how to call into your code other files that you have written in order to seemlessly jump from one bit of the story to the next. We will also be breaking classes and functions into their own files so that it can be available everywhere, so this is quite a crucial piece of information.

Of course, no story is complete without an antagonist or five, so we will have to be able to create enemies for the fight scenes, along with rules (functions) on how those fights are handled, and what happens when things don't go our way.

So, to wrap up, we are going to be covering data structures, classes and objects (object-oriented programming), functions, multi-file use, and user input. There may be some things I've even left out! That is the thing with a project, you can plan all day long, but still some things are unseeable until you are elbow deep in the code. We will deal with how to get around those problems when they arise as well. All-in-all, even if you have never worked with code a day in your life, by the end of this, you will have a working project that usually is expected of a second year undergrad in most colleges. And I promise, you can do it! This is all going to be done with basic building blocks that turn into something major, not much different from your word processor, just smaller.
