+++
title = "Quick Update 2"
date = "2023-01-16T17:45:29-07:00"
author = "Tommie Matherne"
authorTwitter = "" #do not include @
cover = ""
tags = ["update", "changeOfPlans"]
keywords = ["refocus", "data"]
description = "A forced refocus of direction for the site, and myself. We are going to get personal."
showFullContent = false
readingTime = true
hideComments = false
color = "green" #color from the theme settings
+++

# A Forced Focus

So, as I admitted a bit in my previous posts, I am currently unemployed. After looking into the situation that has put me in, as well as my skills, drives, and goals for myself, it has led to a bit of a refocus for the way this site is going to go, and what that means going forward. This comes after a lot of thought with a career counselor, resume reviews, and just what I do with my spare time to keep myself from going insane. It also caused an evaluation of what I want and need from a job going forward in order to survive and thrive. As you can tell from these themes, it is going to get a bit personal. If that isn't your cup of tea, I understand. Please also understand, I don't publish this to lament my lot in life, but to show others that may be in a similar position by fate and happenstance, you are not alone. It is completely okay to reevaluate life, and decide what you want and need from it. Hopefully, my process helps those folks understand that this is not a bad thing, if you find yourself needing to, evaluate your life, and make it into something more tolerable.

First of all, the circumstances I lost my previous job under have some people that I have spoken to about it calling it unfair. I disagree. Those circumstances were that I was under a 90 day probation period at the job. It was laid out to me before I took the job that there was a very strict policy on missed time during that period. If I missed three days, the job was terminated. While my circumstances for missing those days were medical (I had an IBS flare up that caused severe pain, a suspected obstruction), it doesn't change the fact that the job I undertook was a physical one in the tech field, with presence required for the business model to work. They laid that out, and I accepted, knowing my own medical history and not foreclosing that information during the hiring process. If there is anyone to blame for the job being offered and then rescinded within two weeks, it is myself, not my former employer. 

That being said, it has caused me to reevaluate my life, both work and personal, when it comes to managing my illness. I have come to admit that it is, indeed, a handicap. It is not one that prevents me from working. It is just one that prevents me from leaving the house occasionally. In my job previous as a help desk analyst, I was working primarily from home. If need be, I was taking days off due to these issues when they got severe, but when it was about the same as what caused the missed days at my last job, more often than not, I would work. When need arose, I would get off the phones, and then I would return. Even on those days, despite the missed time, I was often a KPI leader in calls taken, and was seen as a bit of a leader on knowledge of the procedures and processes we were expected to follow. Lack of ability to be in office DOES NOT EQUATE to lack of ability to be a valuable team member.

Because of that, I am going to be more up front with this disability, and admit it as such on applications. I am going to ask for flex accomodations to be able to work from home as needed to continue contributing to my work. However, I am going to limit the scope of jobs I look for in the tech field. As mentioned, the last job I had was physical. It involved running cables, installing hardware, and physically assuring system availability and operation when needed. That is not something I can reliably do. I realized that, and started, initially, looking to get back into web development, either front or back end, and slinging code. This is something I have done before. It is also something I quickly burned out on before. Not least of which because usually, the work is mainly front end that is usually desired. I have the artistic ability of a parapalegic newt, I am not the person you want implementing something that is supposed to look pretty or useful! Can I do the job? Yes. I have done it before. Same with back end, can I do it? Yes. In fact, knowledge of back end requirements, what is possible, and thinking outside the box to achieve unusual requests were one of the things that got me notied by a former co-worker that was apparently so appreciative of that skill that even six months after our last conversation, she is still giving me alerts to when new jobs come up that I can fit with where she now works. (If you see this, yet again, THANK YOU! I don't care if you get tired of hearing that, I'll keep saying it, because it really does mean that much.)

Recently, though, trying to put together a portfolio for that end of things reminded me, I don't really want to have to kludge together any more bad code to fix errant requests to make systems work in ways that they shouldn't because there was no design put into the evolution of said systems that have now grown out of spec. And let's face it, that is pretty much the definition of back-end work. So I was left with a conundrum. Where to take my talents and skills? 

I began looking into what I do just because I am bored. I like baseball, but I haven't watched a game in years. To me, part of the allure of baseball is that you don't have to be able to watch it to be able to appreciate it. A look at the box scores can tell you, if you know how to read them, everything that happened over the course of four hours on a patch of grass, hundreds of miles away from you, among twenty or so people. A glance at a standings sheet and roster report can give you a fair idea of what will happen tomorrow among a different grouping of the same size. 

When it comes to games, I love to play them. Video game preferences for me run away from war and shooting, and towards simulation and stratgey. In well made strategy games, either through game menus or observational play, you get to know what situation you are in, and can formulate a plan or new goal based on the resources available to you. For simulations, the same thing arise, whether that simulation be something like SimCity, or a bit more complex, like Dwarf Fortress. Even when the numbers are hidden from view, the systems can be figured out to a degree that allows interaction with a system in a meaningful way to create situations out of seeming chaos. 

That has led me to thinking, data and business analytics is simply using known data to react to chaotic systems such as economy, climate change, and the unexpected in the most meaningful way possible. Do I think it will have the same fun factor as playing Dwarf Fortress, or running a Monte Carlo simulation on a possible baseball outcome? No, I'm not stupid. Work is to complete tasks for others, and to make ends meet. Play is for the other stuff. But at least with this field, I know what I'm getting into, I cannot be sold a bill of goods on changing the world, or getting rich. I'm making information more visible to make decisions more apparent, and trying to remove any possible clouds from that judgement by relating facts that may be uncomfortable. That's not fun, but that is life, and that is something I can accept. 

And it's something I can do from an office, or from home. So it may just be the most perfect fit for what my life is now that I have taken a look at my life's own data, without bias, and accepted, I'm a bit less capable than most. It doesn't make me useless, it just makes me less of a physical presence. But I've already proven, I don't have to be present to be an impact. And I'm going to make an impact.

So, that was a lot of words, what does that mean for this site going forward? Well, for starters, while I'm not likely to do away completely with the HTML/CSS/JavaScript track, it isn't going to be a priority. Honestly, I now the information, and know it well, but other than the JavaScript side, it just isn't me. Those other parts are presentation, and I'm a newt, remember? I'm going to keep going with teaching, because I have quite a few transferable skills. Recently, I got involved in a study group for those breaking into data analysis and I am looking at the information on different aspects that cross over to my old jobs, and I can understand why people are frustrated thinking they can never get this. Do you really need an eight hour tutorial on database design where the first hour and a half is spent trying to clumsily define what data and a database are? Or, as a beginner, do you need just enough information to be able to take an already known-clean data set and shove it into a database in order to begin some analysis? 

Frankly, I think getting people up and running with the tools they need as fast as possible beats the hell out of that. You shouldn't need to take in enough information to be an entry-level database admin in order to get up and running with entry-level data analysis. For goodness sake, if that were the case, the field is vastly underpaid! So I'm going to pivot a bit, and give a few tutorials on how to take a known clean dataset, how to evaluate that dataset in order to build the database it needs, and then import the damn thing. Then analyze it, and possibly use HTML/CSS/JavaScript to make a static page to publish a report. Then, if you are still interested, we'll go above that and get some not so clean data, and work on the more advanced stuff. But not until we already have something to show for ourselves, dammit!

Until then, thanks for bearing with me through all of that. I look forward to posting again, soon.
